When the child refused to see Michael, saying: He hurts my mummy, I want to go home, the court pursued contact for him.
An official from Cafcass, the children and family court advisory service, tried to persuade the child in several interviews, but eventually the official told the court that further persuasion was inappropriate and essentially abusive. The court upheld his recommendation with a final order of no contact for Michael.
Sarah said: When I first went to court I was blind really. He had all of these convictions, he has been arrested, he has been to prison. I thought he has got no chance. How wrong I was.
I got out of a really violent relationship but the court threw me back into harm’s way.
Andrea has been going through the family courts for three years after her ex-partner applied for contact with his child. He has a criminal history of stalking and harassing her. Police say he poses a high risk to her and her family.
Andrea ended the relationship while she was pregnant because of his obsessive behaviour and harassment. He then began stalking.
When my baby was two-months-old, he came to my new home late at night, he told me he had moved to be near me, she said. I agreed to meet him with my baby, but when I did he was only interested in resuming our relationship, which I did not want. He frightened me and tried to manipulate me so I stopped responding to him.
Andrea reported his behaviour to police and he was given a caution. In May 2012, he was arrested and pleaded guilty to harassment, getting 12 months’ probation. Andrea was granted an indefinite restraining order.
When the child was 18-months-old the father applied to the family court for contact. The family court ignored the restraining order the criminal court had put in place and continued with his application, said Andrea. They forced me to attend court without putting any safeguarding in place.
Within two days, her ex-partner had set up a fake social media profile and used it to harass Andrea. He was convicted of breaching the restraining order and fined £100. But in the family court he pursued contact with his child.
Separate Cafcass reports strongly recommended no contact between the man and the child because of the high risk he posed to Andrea.
But in 2015, lay magistrates said he should have indirect contact with his child. They were satisfied the man was engaging with mental health services as required.
Andrea was promised she would be able to give evidence via video link but was later told she had to attend.
I just couldn’t do it, it was just feeding his obsession. I was terrified, she said. As a result, her written evidence was disregarded. The case is now with a more senior judge.
In late 2016, a senior Cafcass official urged the court to make a final order of no contact, saying any contact may feed the man’s obsession and place mother and child at risk. He wrote: It is time the matter was ended … the facts do not argue for contact.
Another Cafcass official agreed, saying a well-documented history of harassment and stalking meant there should be a final order of no contact.
But the judge is continuing the man’s application for contact.
It feels like they are targeting me and my family, said Andrea. I am constantly terrified the court is going to put me and my family in even more danger.
Clare is a victim of extreme domestic violence, who is considered at risk of severe harm or murder at the hands of her ex-partner.
In 2014, while she was tending her baby, he attacked her at home. He was later refused contact with the child but is now challenging that through the family courts.
For the last year Clare, who received legal aid as a victim of domestic violence, has submitted documents, text messages and witness reports to provide evidence of his violence, repeated threats to kill her and her children and his controlling behaviour.
In a two-day fact-finding hearing, the judge upheld almost all of the facts alleged by Clare against her ex-partner, including threats to set fire to her and the children and a threat to rape her. The judge said the threats to kill Clare and her children were hideous.
He acknowledged the behaviour was that of an overly jealous man who wanted to control her, saying one incident was the most upsetting and distressingly abusive thing he had ever heard.
However, the judge is ordering the agencies involved to find a way of allowing the father contact with his young child. Clare said: For me as a mother it shocks me that a judge can see all these violent threats, and see from his criminal record that this is a man who does what he threatens to do, and can be considering allowing him contact with his child. That leaves me speechless.
Violent and abusive men are being allowed to confront and cross-examine their former partners in secretive court hearings that fail to protect women who are victims of abuse, a Guardian investigation has found.
Mothers involved in family court hearings have given graphic descriptions of the torture of being questioned by abusive men – a practice still allowed in civil cases but banned in criminal courts.
They describe how former partners can make repeated, sometimes spurious, court applications to continue the harassment.
In one case, a mother was cross-examined for two hours by her ex-husband despite him being the subject of a restraining order to keep him away from her.
Sarah, whose name has been changed, said: I thought, why does the judge allow him to continue this abuse? I had escaped a really violent relationship, it was a very hard thing to do, and the court threw me back into harm’s way constantly. It was torture for me.
Family courts cases are held in private in England and Wales. The testimony of witnesses, documentary evidence, expert statements and judicial decisions are mostly still secret.
Women who spoke to the Guardian knew they were at risk of being held in contempt of court but said they wanted to shine a light on the secretive processes.
The revelations have prompted one MP to demand a review of the way the court system operates and a change in the law. Peter Kyle, Labour MP for Hove and Portslade, said the situation amounted to the abuse and brutalisation of women by the legal system. Mothers need the protection of the law and they need to know in advance that the system is there to look out and protect their interests, he said.
It only takes one woman to be placed in a situation where she can be legally be asked by the man who has violently abused her; ‘When did you last have sex?’. That only has to happen once to realise that the system is corrupted and domestic abuse is going on in our system in the courtroom.
The evidence obtained by the Guardian spans ongoing and completed cases, interviews with participants, lawyers and court officials. It reveals how the family court:
Research by the all-party parliamentary group on domestic violence found that 55% of women had no access to special measures in the family courts, where 70% of separation and child contact cases involve some form of domestic violence.
One mother whose case was examined by the Guardian was told by a judge to sit next to her ex-partner to view a police video of her reporting his sexual assault. She said: Since when is it OK to force a victim of abuse to sit next to her abuser around a laptop and watch the police video of the statements she made to the police about her sexual abuse? There was no screen in place, they provided no separate room for me.
Polly Neate, chief executive of Women’s Aid, has presented research to the judiciary that shows a quarter of victims of domestic violence surveyed had been cross-examined by abusive partners. When we talk to judges about this they say that this never happens. But it is happening, that is clear, and it seems fairly difficult to get this across, she said.
Neate is in talks with a senior judge selected by the president of the family division, Sir James Munby, to force the courts to follow guidance, known as practice direction 12J, which is designed to protect mothers from direct cross-examination by violent perpetrators of abuse.
Responding to the revelations in the Guardian, Cris McCurley, a family lawyer from the north-east, said: I have worked on hundreds of cases and the direct cross examination of victims by a perpetrator happens a lot. It is absolutely traumatising. We have got to get something in place to stop this, even if it means appointing a special advocate or even a law student to put the questions instead of the perpetrator.
McCurley said the cuts to legal aid and the cutbacks in the whole court estate, meant the situation for vulnerable women within the family courts was getting worse. Women who have suffered domestic violence are entitled to legal aid if they can prove with documentation that they are a victim. Many women do not qualify and are forced to represent themselves before their alleged perpetrator.
Jane Monckton-Smith, an expert in domestic homicides, stalking and coercive control, said the family court system was antiquated. The family courts need to up their game in order to prevent abusive men using the access they are being given by the courts to continue their behaviour, she said.
Monckton-Smith said the case of Ben Butler, the father who killed his six-year-old daughter Ellie after a family court judge returned the child to him and his partner, should have been a warning sign about how some abusive men can manipulate the system and put women and children at risk. But that had not happened.
Legal aid cuts mean increasing numbers of men and women are representing themselves in court, increasing the chance of some men being able to use the process as part of their continuing harassment, abuse and controlling behaviour. Ministry of Justice figures released in October 2016 show in 80% of family law cases at least one of the parties was a litigant in person.
Zoe Dronfield set up a support group, I want my Mummy (IWMM), after her abusive ex-partner was given emergency custody of their child.
I speak out because most women cannot, she said. The family court stipulates that they must not talk about their case, so the secrecy goes on and they are kept silent.
Cases examined by the Guardian reveal that judges in some cases appear to be ignoring advice from agencies including police, social services and Cafcass officials, to allow an abusive man contact with a child.
Mandip Ghai, legal officer for Rights of Women, said: Judges will bend over backwards to try and find a way for contact to take place. We have cases where there has been quite serious domestic violence and Cafcass has recommended no direct contact, but the judge finds a way of deciding to allow it anyway.
Many courts, she said, were failing to carry out fact-finding hearings where there were allegations of domestic abuse and that could put a child at risk.
If there is no fact-finding hearing to establish whether there has been domestic violence, then there is no assessment of the risk the child might be in. There needs to be some thought about how this situation can be improved, she said.
A judiciary spokesman said the president of the family division has acknowledged in public a pressing need to address the issue of abusive men questioning their victims, and the wider issue of protecting vulnerable victims of domestic violence.